when it's born it's just a foot high
but the closer it gets to the shore the
larger it grows
soon it enters shallow waters and starts
to slow down
down there humans tiny like ants
scream and scatter in different
directions the first tsunami wave
crashes into the shore its top moves
faster than the bottom
that's what makes the wave so high and
steep
the lowest point of the wave gets to dry
land first
in the process it creates a vacuum
effect which pulls the water away from
the coast
bearing the harbor and sea floor those
who recognize this first sign of an
approaching tsunami
still have the chance to save their
lives
five minutes later an enormous wall of
water hits the shore
and wipes out everything in its way but
it's not just a single wave
there are many this phenomenon is called
a wave train
how fast this train is traveling depends
not on how far it is from the source of
the waves
but on the ocean depth tsunamis can move
as fast as a jet plane in the middle of
the ocean but once they enter shallow
waters
their speed drops it's very different
when we talk about a tsunami's height
on the surface of the open ocean it's
often no higher than one foot
that's why even experienced sailors may
not notice such unassuming waves
but the sea rises dramatically once the
tsunami nears the shore
the first tsunami wave isn't usually the
strongest
but lots of people don't know it and
make a grave mistake
that sometimes costs them their lives
after the first wave is gone
they relax and believe the danger is
over
that's why the next waves much bigger
and more powerful
catch them off guard the scariest thing
about tsunamis
is that they can travel across entire
oceans with almost no
energy loss a tsunami can travel
thousands of feet inland it's usually so
much water
that its enormous weight and force sweep
away
everything in its path cars trees
people and even buildings the roar of an
approaching tsunami
is louder than a jet taking off
sometimes a tsunami comes as a torrent
of foaming water
at other times it makes the sea withdraw
leaving behind stranded fish
and overturned boats but what can cause
a tsunami
one of the most merciless and
devastating natural disasters
in more than 70 of cases it's an
underwater earthquake
for example the boxing day tsunami which
occurred in 2004 in indonesia
was triggered by an undersea earthquake
the tremors produced several massive
waves
the largest of them was as tall as the
arc de triomphe in paris
a landslide can also cause a monster of
a tsunami
as it happened in 1963 in italy
then more than 9 billion cubic feet of
forest
soil and rock rolled down into a lake
a dark wall of water covered the sky
over a tiny village at the bottom of the
vyant dam
one of the tallest in the world with a
deafening roar
the wave over topped the edge of the dam
taking out
everything in its way the 1980 mega
tsunami in the usa
was also caused by a landslide the upper
1500 feet
of mount saint helens collapsed after a
volcanic eruption
a part of this avalanche plunged into
spirit lake
it pushed the lake waters into a series
of waves almost as tall as the eiffel
tower
volcanic eruptions are responsible for
five percent of the world tsunamis
for example a terrifying tsunami that
occurred in 1883
was caused by the krakatoa volcano going
off in the sundress strait
the eruption nearly emptied the magma
crater under the volcano
the overlying seabed and land collapsed
into it
this created several tsunami waves that
rose higher than 130 feet
above sea level some tsunamis are caused
by meteorites crashing into our planet
that's what happened millions of years
ago when an asteroid struck the yucatan
peninsula
yep the same one that's thought to have
wiped out the dinosaurs
it generated a mega tsunami the largest
in earth's history
the first wave was almost twice as big
as the world's tallest building
the burj khalifa but most tsunamis
about 80 percent of them get born in the
pacific ocean's
ring of fire why well this region got
its name for a reason
it witnesses tons of volcanic eruptions
the portuguese navigator and explorer
ferdinand magellan
visited the world's largest ocean at the
beginning of the 16th century
he found the waters surprisingly calm
that's why the place was called the
pacific
peaceful ocean little did the traveler
know
that it was home to the ring of fire
it's a 25 000 mile long horseshoe shaped
chain of volcanoes
and other seismically active spots it
starts from the southern tip of south
america
and goes all the way up to the north
american coast and the aleutian islands
then it moves down toward japan the
philippines and indonesia
after that the chain curves back into
new guinea
covers the southwest pacific islands and
ends in new zealand
right now the ring of fire isn't
actually a closed ring
but if you consider antarctica's dormant
volcanoes
you'll get the needed shape the largest
and most active volcanoes on the planet
are in this region their mauna loa and
kilauea in hawaii
mount fuji in japan mount saint helens
in the usa
krakatoa in indonesia and many others
anyway the volcanic chain outlines the
pacific ocean and goes over the meeting
points of many tectonic plates
the largest of them are north american
eurasian
caribbean antarctic and others
these plates never stop moving they
collide into
slide past and move below and above each
other
this relentless activity makes volcanoes
erupt
deep ocean trenches appear seemingly out
of the blue
the seven mile deep mariana trench the
world's deepest part of the ocean
is also in the ring of fire it was
formed when one tectonic plate was
pushed under another
these days the nazca ocean plate is
being forced down
and under the south american continental
plate unfortunately
the first plate doesn't want to go down
smoothly the process
uplifts mountains and sends magma closer
to the surface
when energy gets released from the
molten core of our planet
tectonic plates move and scrape against
each other
pressure builds up in those areas and
then produces earthquakes
their epicenters are scattered along the
areas where the tectonic plates meet
almost 90 percent of all the earthquakes
in the world
happen in the ring of fire the strongest
earthquake ever recorded
happened in that region it was 9.5 out
of 10
on the richter scale the voldivia
earthquake
also called the great chilean earthquake
happened on may 22nd
1960. it lasted for almost 10 minutes
the disaster affected an area the size
of california
it also caused huge tsunami waves that
reach the shores of hawaii
japan the philippines australia and new
zealand
experts often describe the ring of fire
as a coincidence
when natural disasters break out on its
opposite sides at the same time
they're never related for example in
several earthquakes rocked kyushu island
in japan
soon after that chile also experienced a
powerful earthquake
7.2 on the richter scale but neither of
those quakes
set off the other the distance between
the epicenters was around 10
000 miles this gap was way too large for
the disasters to be connected
anyway an undersea earthquake makes the
ocean floor
suddenly rise or fall at the boundary of
tectonic plates
this displaces immense volumes of water
and launches the waves that soon turn
into a tsunami
and since earthquakes happen in the ring
of fire more often than anywhere else on
the planet
this region also sets off lots of
tsunamis
by the way even though the pacific is
the largest ocean on the planet
it might disappear in the next 300
million years
the tectonic plates are drifting the
atlantic keeps opening
and the pacific is closing incredibly
slowly but
still one day the americas may collide
with antarctica
which is drifting northward after that
asia and australia
are likely to join this new super
continent this process might create a
new pangaea
it was an ancient supercontinent at
those times the only one on earth
it started to break apart about 200
million years ago
some geologists don't support this
theory they believe that the atlantic or
the arctic oceans are more likely to
disappear
than the pacific